Add psake 5.0.0 release blog post (#51)
psake/docs: blog/2026-04-15-psake-5-0-0-released.md

date: 2026-04-15T12:00:00.000Z
slug: psake-5-0-0-released
authors:
  - heyitsgilbert
tags:
  - release
  - announcement
  - psake
  - powershell
  - build-automation
  - ci-cd
keywords:
  - psake
  - psake 5.0
  - PowerShell build automation
  - declarative tasks
  - task caching
  - structured output
  - GitHub Actions
  - build system
image: /img/social-card.png
draft: false
fmContentType: blog
title_meta: "psake 5.0.0 Released"
---

After years of steady iteration on the v4 line, we're thrilled to announce the release of **psake 5.0.0**—the biggest update to the PowerShell build automation framework since its inception. This release introduces a declarative task syntax, two-phase compilation, local file-based caching, structured output, and first-class CI integration. Here's everything that's new.

<!-- truncate -->

## Declarative Task Syntax

The flagship feature of psake 5 is a new hashtable-based syntax for defining tasks. Rather than relying on positional parameters, you can now describe tasks as structured data with named, validated keys:

```powershell
Task 'Build' @{
    DependsOn = 'Clean'
    Action    = { dotnet build -c $Configuration }
}
```

> Every key is validated at compile time—typos like `DependsOnn` or `Acton` are caught before a single task runs. The original parameter-based syntax still works, so your existing build scripts don't need to change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every key is validated at compile time—typos like `DependsOn` or `Action` are caught before a single task runs. The original parameter-based syntax still works, so your existing build scripts don't need to change.
```

The new `-Quiet` parameter suppresses all console output while still returning the full `PsakeBuildResult` object—including complete error records for any failed tasks. No output is swallowed; it's simply not printed.

This is particularly valuable when psake is invoked by an LLM agent or AI coding tool. Console build logs are noisy: progress messages, separator lines, and timing output all burn through context that the model could spend on the actual problem. With `-Quiet`, the agent gets silence on stdout and a precise, structured result it can inspect programmatically:

```powershell
$result = Invoke-psake -Quiet
if (-not $result.Success) {
    # Full error records are available—no log scraping needed
    $result.Tasks | Where-Object { $_.Error } | ForEach-Object {
        Write-Host "Task '$($_.Name)' failed: $($_.Error.Message)"
    }
}
```

Rather than parsing wall-of-text build output, the agent can check `$result.Success`, iterate `$result.Tasks`, and read `$_.Error` directly—structured data that maps cleanly to a tool call response. Pair this with `-OutputFormat JSON` if you need to pass the result across a process boundary or into a prompt.

## New Testing APIs

> Two new functions make build script testing much more tractable:

Reviewer: Consider an alternative to tractable. I had to look it up, so I'm guessing most people don't know what it means.
